Availability Estimate
Write a paragraph or two describing the achievable Recovery Time Objective (RTO) and Recovery Point Objective (RPO) for this Multi-AZ, multi-region database in terms of:


1.- Minimum RTO and RPO for a single AZ outage
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/database/amazon-rds-under-the-hood-single-az-instance-recovery/

When automated backups are turned on for your DB instance, Amazon RDS automatically performs a full daily snapshot of your data. The snapshot occurs during your preferred backup window. It also captures transaction logs to Amazon S3 every 5 minutes. 

So, for single AZ outage, , we need to look into the following scenarios:

A) Recoverable instance failures

An Amazon RDS instance failure occurs when the underlying EC2 instance suffers a failure. In this scenario, RDS automatically tries to launch a new instance in the same Availability Zone, attach the EBS volume, and recover. 

In this scenario, RTO is typically under 30 minutes.Also, RPO is zero because the EBS volume was recovered.

B) Non-recoverable instance failures or EBS volume failures

If RDS instance recovery attempts are unsuccessful, or the underlying EBS volume suffers a data loss failure, the instance state is set to failed. This situation requires a point-in-time recovery. 

The RTO timing requires starting up a new Amazon RDS instance and then applying all changes since the last backup. So, RTO of 30 minutes for this task would be reasonable .

The RPO is typically 5 minutes as point-in-time recovery captures transaction logs to S3 every 5 minutes. 

C) Availability Zone disruptions

This scenario is unlikely. However, in this case, The RTO would be the time it takes to start up a new RDS instance and then apply all the changes since the last backup. The RPO might be longer, up to the time the Availability Zone failure occurred.


2.- Minimum RTO and RPO for a single region outage

In the event of region outage, the RTO will be the time to promote the read replica.

00:00 - Problem happens (0 minutes)
00:05 - An amount of time passes before an alert triggers (5 minutes)
00:06 - Alert triggers on-all staff (1 minute)
00:16 - On-call staff may need to get out of bed, get to computer, log in, log onto VPN (10 minutes)
00:21 - On-call staff starts diagnosing issue (5 minutes)
00:30 - Root cause is discovered (9 minutes)
00:35 - Remediation started - promote read replica (5 minutes)
00:45 - Remediation completed (10 minutes)

So, an RTO of 45 minutes for this incident would be reasonable.


RPO - Amazon RDS for MySQL uses asynchronous replication, however the replication lag is minimum for a high performance database.
For practical purpose we can consider the replication lag of 10 mins across region. So, the  RPO for region outage is approx 10 mins.
